Tutorial - The power of HogQL's sum() aggregation (#6082)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/hogql-sum-aggregation.md

For example, if you wanted to rank sign up events based on specific criteria, you could use a chain of `sumIf` and different values for different properties. For example, you could sum the `user signed up` event like this:

- 10 points for `is_organization_first_user`
- 5 for `realm = ‘cloud’`
- -1 if `team_member_count_all > 1`

As a HogQL expression, this looks like:

```
sumIf(
	10, 
	properties.is_organization_first_user
) + sumIf(
	5,
	properties.realm = 'cloud'
) + sumIf(
	-1,
	properties.team_member_count_all > 1
)
```

When we breakdown by `person_id`, this gives us a list of users with the highest scores, and we can customize our score this as our definition of "high-potential user" changes.

![Score](../images/tutorials/hogql-sum-aggregation/score.png)

> **Note:** [Person properties](/docs/getting-started/user-properties) can’t be used with HogQL expression series, only event properties.

## Sum with percentages

Using sum, you can access both the total sum and a subset of the same series. This enables powerful options for working with percentages and creating percentage-based series.

> For example, you wanted to compare the percentages of Chrome vs Safari pageviews in a visualization summing to 100%. First, create a series where your divide the Safari pageviews by the total Safari and Chrome pageviews. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's say you wanted to breakdown your the percentage of your total pageviews on Chrome vs Safari in a visualization summing to 100%. To do this, first create a series where your divide the Safari pageviews by the total sum of Safari and Chrome pageviews. 
```

## Scoring criteria

A more creative way to use `sumIf()`  is to give different weights to different values. 

For example, if you wanted to rank sign up events based on specific criteria, you could use a chain of  `sumIf` and different values for different properties. For example, we can sum the `user signed up` event, and give:

- 10 points for `is_organization_first_user`
- 5 for `realm = ‘cloud’`
- -1 if `team_member_count_all > 1`

As a HogQL expression, this looks like:

```
sumIf(
	10, 
	properties.is_organization_first_user
) + sumIf(
	5,
	properties.realm = 'cloud'
) + sumIf(
	-1,
	properties.team_member_count_all > 1
)
```

When we breakdown by `person_id`, this gives us a list of users with the highest scores, and we can customize our score this as our definition of "high-potential user" changes.

![Score](../images/tutorials/hogql-sum-aggregation/score.png)

> **Note:** person properties can’t be used with HogQL expression series, only event properties.

## Sum to percentages

Sum provides more options for percentages, because we can access both the total sum and a subset in the same series. This enables us to create percentage series.

> For example, if you wanted to compare the percentages of Chrome vs Safari, you can create a series where your divide the Safari pageviews by the total Safari and Chrome pageviews. 

Reviewer: > to compare the percentages of Chrome vs Safari

Percentages of what? It's not clear what we're trying to achieve here, so I wasn't able to follow along with the example

Author: reworded

```
sumIf(
	1,
	properties.$browser = 'Safari'
) / sumIf(
	1,
	properties.$browser = 'Safari' or properties.$browser = 'Chrome'
)
```

Next, create another series for Chrome pageviews divided by the total Safari and Chrome pageviews.

```
sumIf(
	1,
	properties.$browser = 'Chrome'
) / sumIf(
	1,
	properties.$browser = 'Safari' or properties.$browser = 'Chrome'
)
```

Finally, chose the time series bar, and set the Y-axis to "Percent (0-1)."

**Want to add a gif, but [blocked by this issue.](https://posthog.slack.com/archives/C045L1VEG87/p1686066149103449)**

## Calculating net promoter score (NPS)

> A similar use case for `sumIf()` is calculating your NPS score. NPS asks how likely would you recommend a product to a friend or colleague on a scale of 1-10. 9s and 10s are promoters, 7s and 8s are passives, and 6s and below are detractors. To calculate your NPS score, subtract your detractors percentage from your promoters percentage.

Reviewer: would hyper link here to a resource on NPS score for further reading on what it is

> **Want to add an NPS survey to your product?** Check out our [NPS survey app](/docs/apps/nps-survey-app). 

> To do this in a HogQL expression, use `sumIf` to check your score, add 1 for promoters, 0 for passives, and -1 for detractors. Divide each by the total number of responses (`properties.score is not null`) to get your score.

Reviewer: nice example
